[THEME MUSIC]
>> My name is Nassim Haramein.
I'm a researcher
in unified physics.
I'm the Director of Research
at the Resonance Science
Foundation.
And I'm the Executive
Director of R&D at Torus Tech.
The "Holographic
Mass" paper was really
an extension of a
nerdier paper in which
I was making calculations
about the nuclei of atoms,
the proton.
And its capacity to create
nucleis throughout the table
of elements, that is the
capacity of confining protons
together.
That is, protons are
positively charged.
And just like when you
bring two magnets together
of the same polarity,
they want to repel,
and they want to
repel very strongly.
Protons are highly
charged and they're
squished together in
a very small radius
of the nuclei of an atom.
And so these forces
are extreme that
keep it there
against the repulsion
they should experience
from their charge.
That force is not well
described in quantum theory.
And I was coming from
more of cosmology approach
and the physics that I was
applying kind of worked
in this earlier paper.
That is, I start to describe the
little proton as a black hole,
as a mini-black hole, a
teeny, weeny black hole,
because it has a lot
of those qualities.
And when I calculated, I
calculated the strength
that a little mini-black
hole the size of a proton
would have in terms of its
gravitational attraction
to another proton.
And it matched--
not approximately--
it matched exactly
that force that
seems to be holding
the protons together
in the nuclei of the atom.
So I thought, this is very
interesting and it cannot be
a coincidence.
And it led, eventually, to
the "Holographic Mass" paper
because I had to explain
how the little proton could
be a black hole, although it
doesn't have the mass that you
would expect from a black hole.
It is a different kind of black
hole than the black holes that
are typically described.
In astrophysics,
the black holes are
thought to be these monsters
that are absorbing everything
around them.
My physics and how I
looked at these objects,
even in terms of
astrophysics, I started
to think about them in a
little bit different ways
because I added
spin and Coriolis
effect in the
structure of spacetime
to make these black holes spin.
And I calculated how fast
it would be spinning.
And I started to realize that
actually, very little material
could fall in a black hole
because it would get flung out,
if you'd like, from
Coriolis forces
and from centrifugal
forces, and so that very
little material could fall in.
And I started to describe
these things early on.
And actually, this has
been confirmed now.
We're starting to see from
astrophysical black hole
in the universe, the
center of galaxies,
that they spin very, very fast.
Some of the latest
measurements show black holes
at the center of galaxies, which
are huge, spinning at some 85%
of the speed of light,
it's remarkable,
and that very little matter
can fall in at those speeds.
And so I was looking
at the nuclei of atoms,
and I was finding that there
was a lot of relationship,
the way the nuclei behaves.
And I thought that
I should apply this.
But when I did, I
had to describe it
a little differently.
And this is why a movie
was published called "Black
Wholes," W-H-O-L-E, because
it's no longer a hole in space.
It's actually-- it's
a different animal.
Because when I had applied
it at the quantum level
and I calculated a
little bit differently
than astrophysical black
holes, I found a new solution
to Einstein field equation.
That is, Einstein's equation
predicted black holes.
Einstein himself, then,
think they existed.
He thought part of his
general relativistic equation
was wrong, like that was just
a mathematical problem, not
actual physical thing
that you could find
a singularity in the universe.
Of course at this time, it
was inconceivable those things
would exist.
So in general, that part of
his equations were ignored.
John Wheeler, later on,
coined the term black hole,
and started to write the math
of what that singularity would
look like.
And eventually, black
holes were found,
mostly in the center
of all galaxies, which
my equations predicted.
But as well, it was found that
black holes have a quantum
interaction.
That is, that the surface--
this is called
the event horizon.
This is the boundary
in which light
is no longer able to escape.
It's sucked into
the singularity.
That boundary is
actually made up
of little Planck
pixels, little pieces
of information of all the stuff
that fell into the black hole.
And this mathematical
solution to black holes
was actually thought to
be a holographic solution.
And that's when the holographic
approach was first born.
And you might have
seen on magazines,
do we live in a
holographic universe?
It became more and more popular.
So I applied that
solution, but a little bit
differently to the nuclei of an
atom, that we call the proton.
And when I did, something
remarkable happened.
I didn't do it the way
the standard model was
doing the holographic solution.
But I made the little
pixels little spheres.
And I calculated how
many of these pixels
were on the surface of
a proton and how many
were on the inside.
And when I did that,
something remarkable
happened because the
energy, or the mass
of all the little Planck spheres
that would be inside a proton
was the exact mass of all the
other protons in the universe.
That is, the mass of the
universe was inside one proton.
That made it
significantly holographic.
That made it really holographic.
Not just as an analogical
terminology, but actually
really holographic,
in which every proton
had the information of
all the other protons.
And certainly, if the mass
of the universe in terms
of information is
inside one proton,
it made it a black hole.
Of course, when
I published this,
it was very difficult
for people to accept.
I had to be able to
explain, how is it
that the proton has
such an incredible mass?
So I started to think about it.
And it's like, well, if the
mass is inside the black hole,
you can't measure it.
What are you measuring?
You're measuring
the relationship
of that mass with its surface.
So then I counted how
many of these little bits
of information are
on the surface,
the holographic surface?
And I made the relationship
between the information that's
inside and the information
that's outside on the surface.
And so how much
information is actually
able to reach us, in terms
of their relationship?
And I'll put it exactly
the mass of the proton,
but I mean, exactly.
So now you imagine,
you have an equation
that involves the mass of
the universe, which is huge.
And by the time you're done with
the simple ratio relationship,
you output the exact mass of
the object you are observing,
or that you're measuring.
So and from those
equation, then I
was able to predict what
exactly the radius should be.
And that's when I made that
prediction that eventually
was measured in a laboratory in
an accelerator in Switzerland,
and confirmed.
So it's very exciting.
And it says something
very fundamentally
different about atoms.
This Schwarzschild Solution is
the solution that was given--
it was the first
exact solution that
was given to Einstein
field equations.
Einstein described
gravity by saying
spacetime is curving in the
vicinity of mass or energy.
So he took gravity
out of the object,
basically, as was described
before him by Newton,
saying that the object
was producing this force.
And he said, actually, it's
the mass of the object curving
spacetime, curving the
structure around it.
Like if you put a
ball on a trampoline,
the surface tend to curve.
And then if you
put another ball,
it looks like it's attracted
because the surface is
curved, right?
So this is described as
the curvature of spacetime
by Einstein.
He give the concept,
and it sounds simple,
but it's hard to
describe in mathematics.
So he had to go through
all sorts of gyration
to actually describe the
elasticity of the membrane,
and how it curves,
and all this stuff.
So it was very complex.
When he wrote it,
they didn't solve it.
Him and his collaborators
were not able to solve it,
and so they published
it as a concept.
And this physicist that was
sick, bedridden at home,
coming back from
the Russian front
where he was fighting,
actually found Einstein papers
within weeks of Einstein
publishing it, and thought,
oh, I can solve that.
And while very ill,
actually solved--
Karl Schwarzschild solved
Einstein's field equation
for the first exact solution.
And guess what it predicted?
It predicted singularity.
It predicted that there
would be places in space
where the mass would be so
high that not even light could
escape.
And he sent it back, and
Einstein was pretty excited
that it had been solved already.
He thought maybe it would take
years and years before somebody
would solve these equations.
But he was very disappointed
that it predicted singularity
because it was like, does that
mean this concept is wrong?
Does that mean these equations
are wrong, and so on?
So it produced
some doubt as well.
But he succeeded in getting
the solution published,
and that became the
Schwarzschild Solution
to Einstein field equation that
is used widely in astrophysics
everyday today to solve
for gravitational field,
and how things orbit around
other things, and all
this stuff.
But it's commonly ignored when
we use them in those equations.
Like if we're trying to
figure out the Earth spinning
around the sun, that, in fact,
if you look at the formulas,
I mean, if you look at the
equations very cleanly,
very appropriately,
the equations
are actually making
the sun a black hole
and making the
earth a black hole.
And then looking at the
relationship between these two
black holes, it kind
of struck me right away
that this is not so
understood, actually.
Why is this happening
and what is it
telling us about the universe?
So I used the
Schwarzschild equation
to eventually
describe the proton.
I called it the
Schwarzschild proton.
I basically said, you could
have called it the black hole
proton, but I was trying
to at least not be
so abrasive to the mainstream.
To the layman, or even to
many physicists out there,
what I'm saying right now may
sound like heresy or craziness.
But I assure you that more
and more physicists are now
coming to the same conclusions.
It actually says
something really
interesting about
our universe and how
matter production is
occurring, and how
our universe came to be.
If you actually look at
the cosmological horizon,
that is the boundary that
we think our universe is,
the radius of our universe.
So there's something really
interesting about that
and I found that very early on.
I was calculating with the
Schwarzschild solution,
the solution that describes
black holes, the solution
to Einstein field equation.
If you take the
horizon radius, so
if you take our
universe's radius,
and you plug it
into the equation,
it gives you exactly the
mass we see in the universe.
So that is, the universe obeys
the condition of a black hole.
Now you'd say, well,
how can that be?
A black hole supposed to
be super dense and super
energetic, and so on.
It doesn't look so
dense out there.
Well, that's because it's
a huge bubble, right?
The universe is extremely large,
has billions of galaxies in it.
And each galaxy have billions
of stars in it and all this.
So a large black
hole doesn't have
to be so dense to
have enough mass
to be considered a black hole.
For instance, cosmological black
holes at the center of galaxies
have about the density of water,
the super-massive black holes
in the center of the galaxy.
So it's really
interesting that we have
black holes inside black holes.
And solutions in
physics have been
shown that you can have worlds
living inside black holes.
You can have orbitals
and all this stuff--
not from me, from
other physicists.
But as well, now you have--
remember the fractal structures,
like fractal black hole
structures from very large
to smaller, galactic-centered
and standard black holes,
and so on, and then
atomic black holes,
mini-black holes and so on.
And so I started to
calculate all this,
and some really remarkable
things happened.
So for instance, if I calculated
how many bits of information
on the surface of every
proton in the universe,
I got the number
of bits that are
on the surface of the horizon
of our universal black hole.
And so that there was a
one-to-one relationship
between all the
information that's
emitted from the protons
inside the universe
to the surface of our universe.
And then I started
to calculate well,
what if our universe was a
proton that swelled up, right?
So then I shrunk our universe
into the size of a proton
and I got the exact
amount of information
that I was calculating
inside a proton.
So that is, if you take
a proton and you grow it
to the size of our universe,
you get exactly what
is called dark energy, or the
energy we see in our universe,
in space, which is the majority
of the mass of our universe.
So it comes out just
right, and so all
of a sudden it's
like, oh this is
where dark matter or
dark energy comes from.
And so I started to
think about it and I--
this is actually unpublished.
I am publishing
papers now showing
that our universe
could have been
a proton in another universe.
So imagine a bubble
universe, OK,
and you have got a proton
in there and it escapes?
And when it escapes,
its escaping
in a larger bubble in which
the density is much lower.
And so the inside density of
that proton pushes it out,
inflates it very, very quickly
to the size of our universe.
And so now you could
imagine universes foaming
off the surface of
other universes.
And when I was writing this,
which I started in 2013--
I know I'm writing slow
these papers because there's
some complexity.
But remarkably,
at the same time,
Einstein published
a paper in 2013.
Most people know that
Einstein hasn't been around,
so how is he publishing papers?
Well, there was a
paper that was lost
and that was found in 2013.
And interestingly,
in this paper,
Einstein was giving
a counter-argument
to the Big Bang
approach, saying that it
was most likely proton are
being created from the vacuum
fluctuation, from these
Planck oscillators in space,
and that proton are
escaping our universe,
describing our universe as a
continuous creation process.
So I'm really happy
that I can cite Einstein
in my paper, Einstein 2013, in
my paper, and it's remarkable.
I think it opens the door to
a completely different view
of matter creation and of
cosmological evolution that
doesn't involve a big bang, but
actually a continuous creation
process occurring at
incredibly large scales,
and all the way down to
incredibly small scales.
This, actually, is the
ultimate as above, so below.
I mean, it's actually
the mathematical equation
that proved that that concept,
that statement that everything
is connected, is not just a
philosophical idea, not just
a bunch of stuff that a
bunch of spiritual masters
have said through history, but
actually is the way things are.
That actually, that's
how mass emerged, that's
how gravity's produced, out
of this fundamental idea
that everything is connected,
that from any point,
you have access to
any other point,
is very, very fundamental
to this theory.
But what is powerful
is that it's
no longer just a philosophy,
a concept out there.
But it is the way things work.
It is how the world comes to be.
This is how you're made
and why you organize
into such a complex
being, and you're
able to actually reflect
on that complexity
itself, which is a
remarkable thing.
It's interesting
because when you
look at the life and the
research of Isaac Newton
and what we know in
modern times now,
that this was unknown
for a very long time
because it was censored.
But his private writings
have reemerged now,
and we know that he
was very much involved
in alchemy and the study of
various ancient civilizations,
very much as well ancient
Hebrewaic traditions.
He learned ancient Hebrew
to decode his own text.
He built replicas of
the Temple of Solomon.
He believed,
literally, that there
was solutions in the geometry
of the Temple of Solomon
that explain gravity, and
that if we could decode it,
we would understand
gravity at a deeper level.
Interestingly, I had a similar
path in that, early on,
since I was not confined by
the institutional structure,
I was studying independently,
I studied ancient civilization
because I was finding parallels
between what I was finding
in physics and what was
present in ancient texts
all from all around the world,
from many different cultures.
This idea that you find
in these ancient views
is that there is
a way to influence
matter and energy in such a
way to make them work for you.
And what happens in
this new view of physics
is that, yes there is, like the
idea of chi, the idea of mana,
the idea of this
field of energy that's
in space that you can
influence is absolutely
present in these new physics.
It actually flushes
out the mathematics
on how it does this stuff.
And so it leads to very advanced
technology, funny enough,
based on very ancient knowing
that was present all along.
And I believe
Newton instinctively
knew it was in there somewhere,
and worked most of his time
on this.
And actually, what he
produced in his laws of motion
and entropy and
gravity and so on,
is actually like a
side chapter for him.
His main interest
was to understand
how to get chemical formulas
to influence matter and energy.
And so I think that there's
a lot of validity there.
And the exciting part is that
if this theory is confirmed,
and is confirmed by experiments
now, so it's very strong,
give legitimacy to this
concept-- for instance,
everything is connected,
everything is one--
but in a very grounded way.
And it leads to the application
of these understanding,
these ancient understanding
to very advanced technology
that could bring us to
the stars, literally.
That can allow us to birth our
civilization into the universe,
into our galaxy, into space
travel, wormhole creation,
the sky is no longer the limit.
It's beyond the sky, and
so it's very exciting.
I think, fundamentally,
what I'm publishing,
how it's changing people's
lives, other than the physics
understanding of reality,
is that it empowers people
to understand that they have
an impact, that they do matter,
[CHUCKLES] if I can use the pun.
And that the matter that they're
made of is where it's at,
meaning spiritual
people have a tendency
to think that it's
outside themselves.
True, but your
physicalness is actually
where you can connect
to that field,
and that's the place
you want to be in.
That's why so many
ancient masters talked
about going inwards
and turning your senses
inward, because that's
where your seat of power
is, inside of you.
And so people get
the mechanisms,
that this is not just
some nice philosophy,
or I'm just going
to do my nice yoga,
or I'm going to do that nice
meditation because it kind
of calms me down and it's nice.
But it's actually,
wow, I could have
all of the power available to
me in the universe present in me
in each one of my atoms.
If I can reach that,
if I can connect
with that at a deep level, I can
have this incredible influence
on the world around me.
And so it empowers people
to understand they matter
and they are amazing
miracles of nature,
and these mechanisms are real.
[MUSIC PLAYING]